Basketball is a team sport created by James Naismith in December of 1891. The sport involves two opposing teams made up of 15 players each. Five players from each team will be on the court at any one time, and player substitutions are during stops in action. The court is rectangular and has two elevated hoops on opposite sides. When players from one team are on the court, they will advance a ball toward the opposing team’s basket and try to get the ball into the basket. They will also try to prevent the opposing team from getting the ball into their basket. There are a multitude of basketball leagues, but the basketball organization held in the highest regard and used for this report is the National Basketball Association, abbreviated as the NBA.

Player efficiency rating, abbreviated as PER, is an advanced statistic created by John Hollinger that helps quantify the value that a player adds to his team. The formula is in the appendix. The PER aggregates individual stats and team stats to measure collected during a game to measure player productivity. In other words, it provides another way to see which player outputs the gaudiest stats. A key aspect of PER is that it can adjust for how much a player plays and team pace. Players that play more minutes have more possession to do something with the ball. In addition, teams with a higher pace have players with larger per-game outputs due to an increased number of possessions. PER takes both into account so that players are not penalized for these factors. Though PER cannot perfectly measure how good a player is due to its inability to capture parts of defense or offense not recorded as stats, it can still look at a player's statistical output by examining metrics that are measured.

The following question was examined for this study: which in-game statistics are the best predictors of Player Efficiency Rating (PER) of NBA players? Knowing which stats increase or decrease PER is a question that NBA front offices must answer. First, players that can produce large output for their teams are instrumental for teams winning. Most championship contenders have NBA players that can produce at a high level. In other words, having players with high PERs can indicate how likely a team is to win a championship for a given year. Knowing the circumstances in which players have higher statistical outputs can help determine whether a team can contend. In addition, PER can also help front offices get an idea of how much a player might make during negotiations. Generally, players with higher productivity get paid more. They can also win awards during a season based on a plethora of factors. Winning these awards and producing at a high level means that a player can make significantly more money during contract negotiations. By predicting a player’s PER, front-offices can predict how much their players and team will get paid.

The dataset used is from Basketball-Reference. It is from December 22, 2020, to February 18, 2021 from the 2021 NBA season. Six explanatory variables were chosen from this data set: win shares, age, free-throw percentage, usage, true shooting, and three point frequency. Win shares are a statistic that estimates how many wins a player adds to his teams through a season. When a player on offense takes more contact than deemed necessary, players will get two shots without defenders guarding them. Free throw percentage is how accurate a player is at taking those shots. Age is how old a player is in years. Usage indicates how often a player will have the ball in his hands when on the court.  True shooting measures how accurate a player is from the free-throw line and the field. Three point frequency measures how often a player shoots threes.
